Exception Handling Guide (#191)
qbicsoftware/data-manager-app: ExceptionHandling.md

# Exception handling

## Common Anti-Pattern

> 

Reviewer: Adding a table of contents would be nice :)

impossible. An empty catch block is a massive red flag.

```groovy
try {
   doSomeWork();
} catch (Exception e) {
   e.printStackTrace();
}
```

This should be fine, right? No. The `printStackTrace()` method prints to `System.err`. This will not
suffice as we cannot be confident that `System.err` is captured in the log files. The exception
might not be detected or available for debugging purposes.

### Decapitation

If we are not encouraged to print the stack trace to `System.err`, then we can throw
a `RuntimeException`.
The following code should solve our problem, right?

```groovy
try {
   doSomeWork();
} catch (Exception e) {
   throw new RuntimeException("I assume an exception due to XYZ")
}
```

Sadly no. By not setting the cause of the new exception to the caught exception, we loose all
information about why the exception occurred.
We cannot understand what happened from the rethrown exception's stack trace. Thus, always set the
cause of thrown exceptions.

### Checked Exceptions

Checked exceptions in Java have to be handled by the calling code. This presents an abstraction
leak.
Why should the calling code know details about the implementation?

> <!-- we use groogy as languate so the formatting works ;D -->

Reviewer: I'd be down for a grog based coding language 🥴 🍺 
```suggestion
<!-- we use groovy as language so the formatting works ;D -->
```

```groovy
public static int countUserPosts() throws IOException {
   Properties userProps = new Properties();
   try (FileReader reader = new FileReader("my-users.properties")) {
      userProps.load(reader);
   }
   return userProps.getProperty("user.posts.count");
}
```

The code above forces the calling code of `countUserPosts()` to handle `IOException`.
How should the caller decide what to do? It does not even know that some property file is read,
this is an implementation detail of the `countUserPosts()` method.

Instead consider an approach like the following:

> <!-- we use groogy as languate so the formatting works ;D -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- we use groovy as language so the formatting works ;D -->
```

```groovy
public static int countUserPosts() {
   try {
      Properties userProps = new Properties();
      try (FileReader reader = new FileReader("my-users.properties")) {
         userProps.load(reader);
      }
      return userProps.getProperty("user.posts.count");
   } catch (IOException e) {
      throw new RuntimeException(e);
   }
}
```

### Log-Rethrow Anti-Pattern

When we catch an exception surely we want to be totally sure we have logged it, don't we? So let's
just catch any exception and make sure

```groovy
public static void someMethod() {
   try {
      // ...
      doSomeStuff(); // e.message = Oh no! Another exception.
      // ...
   } catch (ApplicationException e) {
      log.error(e);
      throw new ApplicationException(e);
   }
}
```

Perfect. Now we have the exception in the log 💪😃!

> ...

Reviewer: NIT: 
```suggestion
```

But wait ...

When we inspected the log we observed "Oh no! Another exception." several times. Why, when did it
occur?

> The confusion inceases...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The confusion increases...
```

Later, after hours of debugging, we notice the following code:

```groovy
public static void anotherMethod() {
   try {
      // ...
      someMethod();
      // ...
   } catch (ApplicationException e) { // the re-thrown exception
      log.error(e);
      throw e;
   }
}
```

We caught, logged and threw the same exception over again. Wow, so all the time we only had one
exception and not several?

> If we hadn't caught the exception to only log it, we would not have the confusing log file to
> understand.

Reviewer: NIT: 
```suggestion
Thanks to the redundant catching and logging of the same exception within the called method and after the method, reading the log file was more confusing than it had to be
```

We would have ended up with only one exception in our log file, stating where it occurred and that
it occured only once.
We would have saved many hours of digging through the code.
**Never** only catch an exception to **log and rethrow** it.
Only [catch exception when necessary](#catch-rethrow).

### Exceptions as control flow

Exceptions are slow. It is cheaper to validate first and then proceed than to throw an exception and
handle it.
When using exceptions for control flow, programmers are forced to write catch blocks and the chance
for swallowing an exception or decapitating an exception increases.

Thus, avoid exceptions for expected or likely outcomes. For expected outcomes consider returning a
meaningful result instead. (_Hint: Java Records present an easy way to implement result objects_)

> <!-- we use groogy as languate so the formatting works ;D -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- we use groovy as language so the formatting works ;D -->
```

```groovy
public static boolean isValidProjectCode(String code) {
   try {
      new ProjectCode(code, "some value");
   } catch (NullPointerException | IllegalArgumentException e) {
      return false;
   }
   return true;
}
```

becomes

> <!-- we use groogy as languate so the formatting works ;D -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- we use groovy as language so the formatting works ;D -->
```

```groovy
public static boolean isValidProjectCode(String code) {
   return ProjectCode.validate(code, "some value");
}
```

When using custom exceptions as flow control, make them extend `Exception` and
not `RuntimeException`
because you intend the calling code to use them to determine the application flow.
As previously discussed, all problems with checked exceptions [discussed here](#checked-exceptions)
apply.
I think this illustrates easily why exceptions for control flow can be a bad idea.

If, on the other hand you reasonably expect a value to be present when no value is present, an
exceptional state would follow.
Thus throwing exceptions is fine in that case. For example:

> <!-- we use groogy as languate so the formatting works ;D -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- we use groovy as language so the formatting works ;D -->
```

```groovy
public static void soSomeStuffWithMyProjectCode(String code) {
   // code is always expected to be valid
   var myProjectCode = new ProjectCode(code, "some value");
   // ... (some complex logic involving myProjectCode)
}

public ProjectCode(String code, Constant constant) {
   if (!validate(code, constant)) {

>       throw new RuntimeException("We encounter something unexpected.");

Reviewer: (Major) NIT: 
```suggestion
      throw new RuntimeException("We encountered something unexpected.");
```

   }
}
```

In those cases we would not `catch` the exception and try
to [handle it as late as possible](#throw-early-handle-late).

**Exceptions as control-flow smell like a _GOTO_ instruction!**
![](https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/goto.png)

## Good practices

### Throw early, handle late

When encountering exceptional circumstances, additional work should be avoided. Imagine an
application calculating salaries for people working at a firm.
One employee, Alice, left the company recently. Let's assume that the computation of a salary is
complex.

If the application would first calculate the salary for Alice and then try to retrieve her bank
account from a list of employees,
an exceptional situation would occur. _(Yes, one could argue that people leaving a company is not
that uncommon but let's assume it is)_.

> Our application would fail after doing all the heavy lifting computing the salary. This is bad. A
> lot of resources wasted.

Reviewer: NIT: 
```suggestion
Our application would fail after doing all the heavy lifting computing the salary. This is bad since a
lot of resources were wasted doing the salary computation.
```

   abstraction leak of checked exceptions.

#### Global exception handling

So we never want to catch unwanted exceptions. How do we save our users from bombardment with stack
traces?
We learned that we should **never expose stack traces to users** as this is a security issue.
So should I rather swallow exceptions and ignore
the [diaper anti-pattern](#diaper-swallowing-exceptions)?

As a developer, you want to feel safe and rest assured that all exceptions are handled somewhere.

The solution is to create a safety net, catching all exceptions that occur. A global exception
handler!
Developers can throw exceptions whenever they want without needing to ensure that they are handled
and without being afraid to expose details to users of your software.

A global exception handler should sit between your software and the
user. [In Spring applications this can be at the REST API level](https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/web/bind/annotation/ExceptionHandler.html).
As Vaadin computes the view server-side, we can use its exception and error handling classes as
global exception handlers;

> See [Routing Exception Handler in Vaadin](https://vaadin.com/docs/v23/routing/exceptions)
> and [Custom Exception Handler in Vaadin](https://vaadin.com/docs/v23/routing/exceptions#custom-exception-handlers).

Reviewer: NIT: The future(v24) is now! 
```suggestion
See [Routing Exception Handler in Vaadin](https://vaadin.com/docs/latest/routing/exceptions)
and [Custom Exception Handler in Vaadin](https://vaadin.com/docs/latest/routing/exceptions/#custom-exception-handlers).
```

Author: Yes, but we do not use it :D and as it may change, I like to have a fixed version in the docs.

> [//]: # (## FAQ)

Reviewer: An additional information section or citing your sources could also be nice so we can inform ourselves further 👍

> [//]: # ()

Reviewer: I'll skip reviewing this section since it's still WIP
